The main goal of this thesis was to evaluate and compare different database systems’ capabilities; precisely the data mining and machine learning (ML) in-database subsystems. Data growth has forced many organizations to down-sample, which affects the machine model's accuracy. The number of systems that process extensive amounts of data is getting smaller and the built of predictive models has become more complex. All this implies that making ML model training inference an integral part of relational query processing could help \cite{Agrawal2020CloudyWH}. These can extensively be useful to organizations and people in these organizations, but also to individuals, who do not have excessive IT knowledge in transforming and optimizing their data and for developing their own ML algorithms. 

Relational database management systems (RDBMS) with accompanying integrated ML toolsets that were evaluated and compared are the following ones: 
  - Oracle with Oracle Machine Learning 
  - PostgreSQL with MindsDB
  - MariaDB with MindsDB
  - SQLite with Python 

Main emphasis was put on analysing predictive performance (accuracy as a typical classification machine learning metric and are under the curve, also known as ROC, and mean squared error, root mean squared error and mean absolute error as typical regression machine learning metrics) and the speed of training. Training time has been defined as evaluation metric, as the complexity of data challenges systems. Comparisons between these running times are most often used in these kind of analysis as seen in \cite{verticalML}. The evaluated combinations were set up in a clean new virtual Linux environment for most substantive analysis. The capabilities of each toolset was tested through relational databases filled with different datasets. Ultimately seven datasets were used of different sizes and imbalanced sets, six with classification problem setting (binary classification and multiclass classification) and one with regression target value. The idea behind using such is to help determine how diversely organized datasets containing different data types also affect the main success indicators. Ultimate comparison was between tools containing same dataset. 

With the received analysis results a basic Decision Support System (DSS) was set up. The idea is that this DSS helps smaller organizations with new projects related to in-database data mining and ML, precisely in selection of the most suitable toolset depending on their needs and appointed evaluation markers. Various utility criteria was defined to use as input, as user's operating system and hardware dependence, data they needed to evaluate and prior knowledge were also considered.
